---
layout: default
type: noheading
color:
category: Report
title: Non-Violent Offenses Drive Admissions to Prison
description: |
---
### What's the difference between these definitions?
Committing Offense is most valuable in determining why someone
was sentenced to prison. In showing probation and parole violations,
it emphasizes the role that parallel criminal justice institutions play in mass incarceration
and highlights reforms in _practice_ that could be implemented administratively.

Longest Sentenced Offense is most useful in understanding what changes in law
are required to reduce the number of people Florida holds in prison, particularly as they
might relate to sentencing.

### Four practical examples of when these definitions would produce different results.
1. **A Single Offense, No Probation to Consider:** In the simplest of cases, someone is convicted of a single offense and sentenced directly to prison, with no prior term of probation. In this case, the offense for which he or she was convicted - be it drugs, burglary, or assault - appears as both the Committing Offense and the Longest Sentenced Offense. Since FY1998, 29% of people admitted to prison had cases like this.

2. **Multiple Offenses:** When someone is sent to prison for multiple offenses, a ranking system is required to identify the single most important offense. The definitions in this report use different ranking systems, occasionally producing different results. For instance, if a prisoner was sentenced to three years for assault and also sentenced to twelve years for a drug offense, his Committing Offense would be the assault charge while the Longest Sentenced Offense would be the drug offense.

3. **Probation and Parole Violations:** 30% of people sentenced to prison in Florida since FY1998 were sentenced to prison for a violation of probation. If an individual was sentenced to probation for burglary and subsequently sentenced to prison for a violation of the terms of probation, his or her Committing Offense would be a violation of Probation. The Longest Sentenced Offense would be burglary.

4. **Multiple Offenses and Probation Violations:** Some people committed new offenses while on probation, and were sentenced to prison both for a violation of probation and for a new offense. Take someone on probation for assault who violated probation and was sentenced to prison for a new burglary charge. If both cases were sentenced to the same amount of time, the Committing Offense would be burglary (it was the offense that most proximally precipitated his incarceration), and the Longest Sentenced Offense would be assault (Longest Sentenced Offense ignores violations of probation and, if sentence lengths are equal, prioritizes more violent offenses.

