---
layout: default
type: noheading
color: white
img: blank.png
category: Report
title:
description: |
---

## In 2015, Florida had the third largest prison population in the country.
Mass incarceration affects all of the United States, but only California
and Texas have larger prison populations than Florida. Louisiana, Oklahoma,
and Delaware have the highest rates of incarceration. Florida's imprisonment rate
(500 prisoners per 100,000 residents of all ages) is 20% higher than the
national average.

## Until 2000, New York and Florida had similar prison populations and imprisonment rates. Today, Florida incarcerates twice as many people.
As you watch the size of each state's prison population expand,
compare the trajectories of New York and Florida. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s,
the two states had similar prison populations and similar rates of imprisonment.
Both states were early adopters of laws that increased penalties for drugs
and lengthened sentences for violent offenses. After 2000, however, the
two states diverged. New York scaled back its War on Drugs and maintained
parole as a method to release people it deemed to pose little threat to
public safety. Florida, on the other hand, doubled down on drug offenses -
passing laws to increase penalties for opioids and making it possession
charges easier to prosecute. Florida also passed a law called "10 - 20 - Life,"
which established mandatory minimum sentences for people who used a gun
during a crime. (Some people sentenced to twenty years in prison
never hurt anyone and fired a warning shot in self defense.) Florida's abolition
of parole in 1983 also limited the ability of the state to release people
who no longer are dangerous. These policy divergences have culminated
in a profound difference: Florida has almost twice as many prisoners
as New York.

Although policy differences resulted in vastly different prison populations
and their associated costs, the two paths taken by Florida and New York
did not result in different outcomes when it came to crimes committed.
Both states saw crime rates decrease significantly since 2000. New York's
crime rate is down 29%, and Florida's is down 28%.

## Prison populations have increased far faster than the general population.
The US prison population has septupled since 1970. In 1970, Florida
had the third highest imprisonment rate in the country -
of each 100,000 residents, 135 were prisoners. Oklahoma (with an imprisonment rate of 142
per 100,000 residents) led the nation in imprisonment. Today, Massachusetts, the state
 with the the country's _lowest_ imprisonment (146 per 100,000 residents) has
a higher imprisonment rate than Oklahoma had in 1970. (It is worth noting
that Massachusetts' imprisonment rate is deflated because it
sentences many people to incarceration in local jails instead of prison;
its total incarceration rate is significantly higher.) If Florida today
and the same imprisonment rate it had in 1970, it would confine 71,000 fewer
people in its prisons. If the costs per prisoner remained the same, the state
would avoid **$1.5 billion** in corrections expenses every year.
