---
layout: default
type: noheading
color: white
img: blank.png
category: Report
description: |
---
### Most people age out of criminal behavior, making the practice of incarcerating people for decades questionable public policy.

<iframe src="DataVisualizations/recidbyage.html" height='400' width='960' frameborder='0' scrolling='no'></iframe>

Criminological studies have shown that most people age out of criminal behavior by age thirty. In general, as people age, they are much less likely to engage in crime.<sup>28</sup>

Data tracking the re-imprisonment of people released from Florida prisons reflects these broader trends. Only 2% of people age 60 or older released from Florida prisons between FY2005 and FY2010 were re-imprisoned for a violent felony within five years of their release. Overall, 19% of people 60 and older returned to prison, but 32% of these recidivists were re-incarcerated for a violation - not a new offense.

<small><small>Note: The methodology of this recidivism analysis differs from that of the Florida Department of Corrections in several ways. This analysis identified all people released from Florida prisons between July 1, 2005 and June 30, 2010, and followed each of them for five years. An individual was considered a recidivist if he or she returned to prison within the five-year time frame, in which case the reason for his or her return was recorded. If an individual appeared multiple times in the sample (i.e., he or she was released from Florida prisons twice during the study period) both releases were included in the sample. (The Florida Department of Corrections considers only "first releases," or the very first time an individual was released from their facilities. All subsequent entries and releases are excluded from FDC's analyses.)<sup>29</sup></small></small>

