---
layout: default
type: noheading
color: rgb(248,248,248)
category: Report
title:
description: |
---
### Florida's criminal justice policies have often been at cross-purposes.
For decades, Florida legislators have known that prisons are costly and inefficient,
and they have occasionally taken steps to reduce the state's over-reliance on
incarceration. The Legislature established (and later repealed) a ceiling
for the prison population. It instituted procedures to allow prison and parole
administrators to release people before the end of their sentence—at times
to address overcrowding and in response to litigation, but also as a way
to incentivize good behavior and in recognition of prisoners’ ultimate
return to Florida communities. On
numerous occasions, the Legislature
appropriated money to improve rehabilitation programs.

None of these efforts has been successful in reducing Florida's prison
population, in large part because the
Legislature almost simultaneously took actions that pushed the criminal
justice system in the opposite direction. Legislators increased penalties for drugs
(in 1987, 1989, 1992, 1994 and more), ratcheted up punitive
 responses across the board, and slowly stripped judges of
 their power and discretion, effectively
transferring authority from judges to prosecutors.

When these policies predictably
resulted in an extremely high rate of incarceration, state policy makers
took steps to hide the costs from taxpayers, borrowing billions of dollars
 and shifting the costs to future.
From 1987 to 2011,
the state embarked on an unprecedented construction spree, building 46
new prisons and 34 new smaller facilities.<sup>4</sup>



#### A ceiling on the prison population.
In 1983, the Florida Legislature passed a law that it hoped would
act as a "reasonable containment of criminal justice expenditures."
It placed a ceiling on the number of prisoners the state could confine --
275 per 100,000 residents. The legislation provided that, over time and
as Florida invested in noncustodial alternatives to incarceration,
this ceiling would fall to 250 prisoners per 100,000 residents. By way of comparison,
Florida's state imprisonment rate today is 500 per 100,000 residents.
(This figure reflects only the state prison population, and does not include
people confined in county jails, federal prisons, or juvenile lockup facilities.)


 <div class="col-lg-6 col-sm-6">
 <div class="textbox">
    <h4><i>Costello v. Wainwright</i></h4>
     <small> In 1972, inmates in the Florida prison system filed a class
     action suit (Costello v. Wainwright) against the State of Florida, c
     Citing issues of prison overcrowding, sanitation and health care
     deficiencies. The State of Florida spent the next 21 years in
     litigation and under the supervision of the Federal government. Over the period of a whole generation, Florida responded through a variety of strategies in order to satisfy the Court. In terms of addressing overcrowding, responses could be summed up in two categories: 1) attempts to control the growth of the prison population; and 2) prison construction to answer projections of growth driven by an increasingly more punitive sentencing structure. The second strategy prevailed, resulting in tens of thousands new beds.
     </small>
 </div>
 </div>

The Legislature was motivated not only by the expenses of building and
maintaining prisons, but also by recognition  that incarceration was
not the only method nor, under certain circumstances, the most effective way of ensuring public safety andrehabilitating criminals. The 1983 legislation provided increased funds for alternatives to incarceration, and was, in part, motivated by the Legislature’s observation that  "The effectiveness of incarceration ...
 is not conclusively positive."<sup>5</sup>

#### Small steps reduced confinement.
The Legislature took some steps to keep Florida's prison population below
the 1983 ceiling. In 1987, it introduced "administrative gain time,"
a process by which prisoners who behaved well while in prison received
time off of their sentences.<sup>6</sup>



#### Countervailing policies grew the system.
Efforts to limit the number of people in Florida's prisons were quickly overwhelmed by the effects of policies and practices that drew more people into the criminal justice system. New laws increased penalties for drug offenses, lengthened sentences for  many types of offenses, and ensured that prisoners would spend more time in prison.<sup>7</sup>

Instead of paying for
prison construction out with cash (through payments
known as "fixed capital appropriation"), a newly-empowered state agency
named the Correctional Privatization Commission took out enormous loans
to build new prison facilities. Even after the Correctional
Privatization Commission was shut down (due to a flurry
of corruption scandals), Florida continued to borrow money to build new
prisons. Between FY2006 and FY2011, the state spent or borrowed almost
$1.5 billion to pay for prison construction. This spending
paid for prisons to be constructed in Lafayette, Gadsden, Marion,
Washington, Wakulla, Jackson, Polk,
Santa Rosa, and Suwanee Counties.<sup>8</sup>

In 2015, Florida still owed more than $500
million in principle of the debts it incurred for prison construction. By
the time it pays off these debts in 2030, the state will have paid
an additional $690 million in debt service.<sup>9</sup>



