---
layout: default
type: noheading
category: Report
---
 <hr class="section-heading-spacer">
   <div class="clearfix"></div>

<h2 id="note" class="offset">Florida Criminal Justice Reform: Understanding the Challenges and Opportunities</h2>

Another year has come and gone and the Florida Legislature failed to prioritize systemic criminal justice reform. Yet Florida's prison system remains in crisis, plagued by years of documented problems in staffing, safety, health care, transportation, and facilities.  This inaction assures the system persists as dire and dangerous, with no prescription yet written for sustained and systemic improvement.  Floridians deserve a deliberate and accountable response.

With 97,000 prisoners, another 135,000 people under probation or similar supervision, a staff of more than 20,000 employees, and numerous private contracts to manage, Florida's prison system is massive.  And reforming it is understandably a massive undertaking.  But it can be done, though not through inaction.

As the third largest prison system in the country, the Florida Department of Corrections is an entity comparable in size to the populations of St. Petersburg or Orlando; it's larger still than 43 of Florida's 67 counties. The expanse of the system also demands expense. Florida taxpayers will spend more than $2.4 billion this year, and will continue to spend at least as much each and every year for the foreseeable future.  Florida also has one of the highest incarceration rates in the country--a rate more than 20 percent higher than the national average.

Florida policy makers should be readily able to answer how well these fundamental characteristics of Florida's prison system--high incarceration rates and enormous public expenditures--meet rigorous standards for both safety and cost-efficiency.   Do the current investments, practices, and policy strategies employed by our state's criminal justice and correctional systems result in the safety returns Floridians expect and deserve?

We call attention to these questions, noting, that though Florida continues to experience a decades-low crime rate, the crime rate is 15 percent higher than the national average.  We call further attention as we ponder the resulting outcomes evidenced as more than 30,000 people cycle in and out of the Florida prison system each year. Nearly all prisoners (87%) eventually return to our communities, so meeting the rehabilitative purposes of our corrections system is imperative for safety.  Yet 69% of prisoners are rearrested within three years of release.

While noting the many structural and operational deficiencies of the system, which the Project on Accountable Justice and others have addressed previously, this report illuminates areas for further discussion and remedy. In particular, Florida's current sentencing regime demands a review.

Although prison admissions over the past decade declined 28 percent, sentence lengths increased by 22 percent. How much more safety do Floridians get with this increase? "There is considerable research validated by the FDC (and others) that the length of imprisonment has no impact on recidivism rates."

> "Among national criminal justice reform advocates, Florida is the great 'white whale.' It is the state that every reformer dreams about as fervently as Captain Ahab dreamed about Moby-Dick. Over the last 10 years, most of the states in the American South have passed major reform legislation to improve public safety, cut wasteful spending, and better restore victims--but Florida, one of the biggest and most influential states in the country, has remained a stubborn exception." Vikrant Reddy, Charles Koch Institute, The Journal of The James Madison Institute, at: https://www.jamesmadison.org/publications/detail/criminal-justice-reform-in-florida-2016-and-beyond (October 2016).

We spend $300 million a year to incarcerate people for drug offenses, but less than $1.50 a day to educate and rehabilitate a prisoner. We release more than 30,000 people per year, yet 69% will be re-arrested within three years.

It's true that by locking up dangerous people, the Florida prison system incapacitates some of the most dangerous criminals.  But it also true that the Florida prison system might more effectively leverage its resources--both financial and human--through shifting, as appropriate, more resources toward the expansion of safe and proven alternatives to prison, like community-driven sanctions and research-driven accountability mechanisms like veterans and drug courts.

Seventy percent of people entering prison in FY2015 were sentenced for a non-violent offense; fifty-five percent of prison admissions had no FDC record of any violent felony; we imprison more than 15,000 people for drug offenses. In these cases, is a prison sentence always the most beneficial and cost-effective response?

We did not get here overnight, nor will these problems be alleviated overnight. The condition Florida finds itself in is the result of decades of criminal justice policies that have often been at cross-purposes. Efforts by policy makers in years past to reform the system have proved meager in the face of laws and policies like mandatory minimums and sentencing enhancements. Like all public policy decisions, prison population expansion should have been met with tough accountability questions--the kinds of questions we ask readers to pose while looking at our findings and others.

We cannot stress enough that this will require the diligence of Florida's policy makers to undergo a systemic policy and budget examination, which can only be supported through rigorous and continued data examination.  Otherwise, we implore, we will remain forever behind the eight ball. The Florida prison system will not fix itself.

A recent example occurred in the 2017 Session. The Florida Legislature increased the budget of the Department of Corrections by $35 million. These funds were needed. The state's prison system is operating far below basic staffing levels vital to ensure basic safety, let alone provide the kinds of educational and rehabilitative programs that are proven to reduce re-offending when people are released. But these stop-gap funds will have only the most limited impacts; they are enough to replace some old vehicles, but fill only one quarter of the staffing deficit the system faces to ensure basic safety. Our taxpayer investments in Florida's prison system should do more than merely get us through to the next fiscal year. There are many, many examples to reflect upon--many of which have been delivered previously to the Florida Legislature and the Governor.

Without significant change, Florida will remain on its current path, spending billions of taxpayer dollars without a plan beyond the next fiscal year. Of course, money for corrections means less money for everything else--most relevantly for proven alternatives to incarceration that measurably achieve more for public safety--for more officer training, drug treatment and community mental health programs, for specialized courts, for re-entry supports and services aimed to keep fewer people from returning to crime.

Florida can take a different path. We can make safely reducing our prison population a priority. We can reengineer our criminal justice system to serve the ends of public safety. And we can use research to ensure that we do this safely. Other states--Georgia, Texas, South Carolina, Oklahoma, Alabama, Mississippi and the latest neighbor added to the rolls, Louisiana--are leveraging data to cut costs better meeting the needs of their citizens as a result.

Floridians strongly support change. Seventy-two percent of us agree or strongly agree that it is important to reform the criminal justice system in Florida. Even more agree that the prison population is costing our country too much money. And almost two-thirds of Floridians want to find ways to release prisoners serving time for nonviolent offenses. These results are instructional--and point to the public's expectation that we must do better.

This report is an effort to help Florida's understand the nature of some of the problems found in Florida's criminal justice system, notably resulting in dangerous prisons. It shows who is going to prison and why, who is in prison and for how long, and suggests opportunities for reform. It reveals disparities that suggest that how the justice system treats you may depend more on where you live than what you do. Floridians must decide whether we will be party to a system that is failing, or embrace the immense opportunities to use data to drive change. Please think about this question as you read this report, and imagine a healthier correctional system that keeps us safe and wisely invests in what works to reduce crime and costs.

Deborrah Brodsky, September 2017

