---
layout: default
type: noheading
---

   <hr class="section-heading-spacer">
   <div class="clearfix"></div>

<h2 id="conclusion" class="offset">Conclusion and Recommendations</h2>

Florida policy makers should be able to answer how well fundamental characteristics of Florida’s prison system --- high incarceration rates, poor public safety returns, and enormous public expenditures --- meet rigorous standards for both safety and cost-efficiency.   Do the current investments, practices, and policy strategies employed by our state’s criminal justice and correctional systems result in the returns Floridians expect and deserve?

It is possible to reengineer the prison system. A smaller system that judiciously reserved incarceration only for the purpose of incapacitating dangerous individuals would face far fewer challenges and accomplish better results. Achieving a better system will require sustained, purposeful, and systemic reform.
 
As this report shows, previous adjustments in attempts to reduce the impacts of Florida’s criminal justice system were either too limited or too fleeting to overcome the forces of inefficiency that led to growth of our prisons. Given early discussions by the Florida Legislature, coupled with heightened attention to the continuing problems faced by the prison system, we are hopeful that the 2018 Legislative Session will be a notable line in Florida’s history --- a place where we depart from historical inertia and growth and instead turn to rightsizing our state’s prison system. Florida can join our neighboring states --- every single state that surrounds us and many more --- and take deliberate steps toward more rational criminal justice policies and practices.

We urge Florida leaders to begin to unravel the policies and practices that grow the prison population without making us safer. First and foremost, we urge Florida’s decision makers to embrace potential changes with more transparency and full accountability.  This can be done with rigorous, relevant, and sustained oversight and data collection and evaluation.

The following recommendations provide additional guidance from previous research and point to ongoing efforts where there are opportunities for reform.


### Enhance External Oversight.
PAJ has previously recommended the implementation of a state-level criminal justice oversight body. We are not so much wedded to any particular structure as to the concept that external oversight is a proactive and collaborative means by which the State of Florida can improve transparency of and accountability for correctional facilities. One option to consider would build upon existing law (944.23, Florida Statutes) that authorizes the Governor, Cabinet members, members of the Legislature and Commission on Offender Review, judges of state courts, state attorneys, and public defenders to access prisons, even without notice.  Several legislators have recently used their authority to heighten awareness of the problems of Florida prisons. We encourage every legislator to leverage the authority vested in them by Florida law and to explore the creation of an independent oversight body. See [Recommendations to Advance Public Safety through Increased Transparency, Accountability, and Oversight of the Florida Department of Corrections](http://iog.fsu.edu/paj/documents/Recommendations%20to%20Improve%20DOC%2011-12-14.pdf).


### Build a Robust System of Risk-Based Pretrial Practices.
The current money-based, rather than risk-based, bail system that drives our pretrial detention and release decisions does so at great cost, both in human and financial terms, as well as in public safety outcomes. Under the existing money bail system, people who cannot pay even small bail sums for petty offenses stay in jail for long periods of time and at great public expense while dangerous people can buy their way out. Social scientific research has demonstrated that unnecessary pretrial detention results in more and longer incarceration and increased recidivism, so this reform is likely to have entailing benefits. See [Reforming Florida’s Pretrial Decision Making](https://www.jamesmadison.org/library/docLib/Journal-Spr2017-ReformingFloridasPreTrialDecisionMaking.pdf).)

### Keep Youth Out of Confinement and the Adult Criminal Justice System.
Build upon research-based successes of the juvenile justice system and keep children out of adult court and residential sanctions.  Children have an immense capacity for development and redirection.  Incarceration and adult sanctions are criminogenic, meaning that they encourage rather than inhibit criminal behavior.  The Florida Department of Juvenile Justice’s developmentally appropriate efforts to keep children in their communities, with familial, educational, medical, therapeutic, and social supports lead to better individual and safety outcomes. See [No Place for a Child: Direct File of Juveniles Comes at a High Cost; Time to Fix Statutes](https://www.jamesmadison.org/Library/docLib/2016-Juvenile-Justice-Policy-Brief-21.pdf).

### Review and Modernize Sentencing.
Consider options that modernize Florida’s sentencing practices.  Recent research has demonstrated that long sentences like those that characterize Florida’s prison system have been “a failed public policy.” Long sentences have cost billions of dollars and had limited effects on crime rates. The Florida Legislature should take steps to restrict incarceration to dangerous individuals, recalibrate sentences so that the punishment fits the crime, and establish systems whereby people who are no longer dangerous have a possibility to return to society as productive citizens.  For example, see [Smart on Sentencing: Safety Valve for Florida’s Drug Trafficking Offenses](https://www.jamesmadison.org/library/docLib/PolicyBrief-MandatoryMinimums-v06-web.pdf); [Florida’s Aging Inmate Population](http://www.iog.fsu.edu/paj/documents/Florida%20Aging%20Prisoners%20March%2027%202015.pdf); [Stuck in the 80s](https://www.jamesmadison.org/publications/detail/stuck-in-the-80s); [Poor Results, Good Intentions](https://www.jamesmadison.org/publications/detail/poor-results-good-intentions); [The High Cost of Incarceration in Florida: Recommendations for Reform](http://reason.org/files/florida_prison_reform.pdf).

### Encourage Local Solutions.
Reduce incarceration by encouraging local innovation, restorative justice, and community-driven solutions to crime and offending through performance incentive grants. Florida’s diverse communities face different challenges and local solutions are often the best. The savings that result from reduced incarceration should be used to form a competitive, transparent, data-driven grant process to develop locally responsive initiatives that would further reduce incarceration (i.e, pretrial services, risk assessment, specialty courts, therapeutic interventions, law enforcement training, reentry housing, etc.). See [Link Juvenile Justice Funding to Performance](http://iog.fsu.edu/paj/documents/JMI-Justice%20Funding%20to%20Performance%20Journal%20article.pdf) and [Better Returns for a Safer Florida: Aligning Taxpayer Investments in the Juvenile Justice System with Strategies Proven to Increase Public Safety](https://www.jamesmadison.org/library/doclib/BetterReturns20142.pdf).

### Measure Criminal Justice Success.
Florida publicly reports, in a variety of capacities and forms, millions of pieces of data collected in the everyday operation of its corrections and criminal justice systems.  However, the collection and sharing of such information may be refined and strengthened so as to support public safety priorities as well as to ensure public engagement in and accountability of their local justice systems.

Without measured results, success is indistinguishable from failure.  Without understanding what success and failure look like, policy makers cannot learn what practices are working, inhibiting their ability to strategically eliminate or expand particular initiatives. One promising project that has come into Florida’s criminal justice measurement is the Measures for Justice data portal.  At present, there are six states included and as many as 32 “Measures” of county-level criminal justice performance, from arrest to post-conviction in terms of fair process, public safety, and fiscal responsibility.  Currently Florida’s county-level criminal justice data populate 20 of the measures.  As the foundation for this groundbreaking work is already built, and as the state makes changes across its justice system, Florida should actively pursue fully populating the data portal toward continued and sustained performance measurement across counties, across the state and, as the Measures advance, across the country.   Florida would lead the nation in having access to these important data, already significantly underway; data can be the launching point for change. See [Measures for Justice](https://www.measuresforjustice.org/) and [Counting Criminal Justice to Save Money and Improve Public Safety](http://www.tbo.com/opinion/columns/column-counting-criminal-justice-to-save-money-and-improve-public-safety/2324906).


