---
layout: default
type: chartlefttall
color:
category: Report
title: Non-Violent Offenses Drive Admissions to Prison
description: |
link: datavis/admissions.html
---
There are multiple ways to describe the causes of a prison admission. This report
uses two methodologies for determining an individual's offense.

### Committing Offense
The Committing Offense is the most serious charge for which an individual is sentenced to prison.
It prioritizes violent offenses over property, drug, and other offenses. The Committing Offense
variable captures violations of probation, parole, and conditional release.

### Longest Sentenced Offense
The Longest Sentenced Offense is the offense that carries the longest sentence, regardless of the
seriousness of the offense. However, when two offenses carry the same sentence, this variable, like
Committing Offense, prioritizes violence. In cases where an individual is admitted to prison for a
violation of probation or parole, the Longest Sentenced Offense reveals the underlying charge.

### What's the difference between these definitions?
Committing Offense is most valuable in determining why someone
was sentenced to prison. In showing probation and parole violations,
it emphasizes the role that parallel criminal justice institutions play in mass incarceration
and highlights reforms in _practice_ that could be implemented administratively.

Longest Sentenced Offense is most useful in understanding what changes in law
are required to reduce the number of people Florida holds in prison, particularly as they
might relate to sentencing.

